Timestamp: 20120107061536
Title: BBC News - Neanderthals cooked and ate vegetables
Text: 
Neanderthals cooked and ate vegetables
                                                    
By Pallab GhoshScience correspondent, BBC News         

 Hunter, gatherer, vegetarian masterchef?

Neanderthals cooked and ate plants and vegetables,  a new study of Neanderthal remains reveals.

Researchers in the US have found grains of cooked plant material in the teeth of the remains.

The study is the first to confirm that the Neanderthal diet was not confined to meat and was more sophisticated than previously thought.

The research has been published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.

The popular image of Neanderthals as great meat eaters is one that has up until now been backed by some circumstantial evidence.  Chemical analysis of their bones suggested they ate little or no vegetables.

This perceived reliance on meat had been put forward by some as one of the reasons these humans become extinct as large animals such as mammoths declined.

But a new analysis of Neanderthal remains from across the world has found direct evidence that contradicts the chemical studies. Researchers found fossilised grains of vegetable material in their teeth and some of it was cooked.

Although pollen grains have been found before on Neanderthal sites and some in hearths, it is only now there is clear evidence that plant food was actually eaten by these people.

 Continue reading the main story 
“Start Quote

We have found pollen grains in Neanderthal sites before but you never know whether they were eating the plant or sleeping on them or what”
End QuoteProfessor Alison BrooksGeorge Washington University
Professor Alison Brooks, from George Washington University, told BBC News: "We have found pollen grains in Neanderthal sites before but you never know whether they were eating the plant or sleeping on them or what.

"But here we have a case where a little bit of the plant is in the mouth so we know that the Neanderthals were consuming the food."

More Science & Environment stories
 RSS 



          

Top stories

    

                

Features & Analysis




Identity crisis? 

What Republicans could learn from UK Tories' wilderness years 





Mississippi Blues 

Why is the Delta still so poor? 





Keeping guard 

Libya's revolutionary militias are reluctant to down weapons 





