Timestamp: 20120427061842
Title: BBC News - Lib Dem Simon Hughes joins call for Jeremy Hunt inquiry
Text: 


Deputy leader Simon Hughes has become the first senior Liberal Democrat to join calls for an inquiry into whether Culture Secretary Jeremy Hunt breached the ministerial code of conduct.

Downing Street says there are no plans to investigate the contact between News Corp and Mr Hunt's ex-special adviser.

Mr Hughes said he could not understand why the issue was not being referred to the independent watchdog.

Employment Minister Chris Grayling said only "half the story" had been told.

On Wednesday, Mr Hunt's special adviser Adam Smith resigned over the extent of his contact with News Corporation during its planned takeover of satellite broadcaster BSkyB.

Mr Hunt, who was responsible for Mr Smith's actions under the ministerial code of conduct, has said he "strictly followed due process", and denied that News Corp had had any "back channel" of influence with his office, which had to rule on the bid.
 'Reconsider'
Mr Hughes said on the BBC's Question Time on Thursday that at the moment he did not think Mr Hunt should resign.

But he added: "What I cannot understand is why the matter of the ministerial code of conduct is not something the prime minister immediately should refer to the person who's been given the job to do it.
  

           



                      
Mr Hunt faced a barrage of rowdy criticism from the opposition benches as he put his case to MPs


"Only the prime minister can do that. He has so far, I gather, resisted doing it. I don't think it gets in the way of the Leveson Inquiry and the evidence - it's a separate matter.

"I don't know why he hasn't done it but I would have thought, to give confidence in the system, I hope the prime minister reconsiders his view.

"That must be in Jeremy's interest. If Jeremy is correct in what he's said, he'll be vindicated. If he's not, then he has to take the consequences."

Mr Hughes said there were "severe questions" Mr Hunt had not yet answered.

Details of the contact between Mr Smith and News Corp emerged in a series of emails seen by the Leveson Inquiry, which is examining press standards and practices.

Speaking on Question Time, Mr Grayling said: "What we've got now is half the story.

"We've got a collection of emails released by a [News Corp] PR man to his bosses - which we know contain plenty of spin because they suggest that he had had meetings and discussions with Jeremy Hunt that he now accepts he hadn't had.

"That's the only evidence that's out there."
 Resignation call
Shadow culture secretary Harriet Harman has written to the prime minister calling for him to get his independent adviser on ministerial conduct, Sir Alex Allan, to launch an inquiry into whether Mr Hunt breached the ministerial code.

Labour leader Ed Miliband said it was impossible to believe that Mr Smith had "acted as a lone wolf" and the party has called for the culture secretary to resign.

Mr Hunt told the Commons that Permanent Secretary Jonathan Stephens had approved Mr Smith's role as liaison on the BSkyB deal.
  

More UK Politics stories
 RSS 



                

Top stories

    

                

Features & Analysis




Dramatic improvement 

How soap operas have changed the world 





News quiz 

Which food has been linked to faster running times? 





