Timestamp: 20060701045201
Title: BBC - Weather Centre - World Weather - Features - Travellers Tips - Hot and Dry
Text: 

But how should we all cope with hot, dry weather when we're on holiday?

Let's face it. In the UK, we're no experts at hot weather. At the first sign of a bit of home sunshine we're all outside, working on our tans as if there were no tomorrow. (Reasonable enough, really, as assuming there is one, it'll probably be cold and damp.) And every year, millions of us jet off to the hottest country we can afford to get to - and do exactly the same thing.

The crazy thing about it is that there's usually no need. We all know the sketch from the TV comedy show where the weather forecaster only ever says 'scorchio!', and it's not just a joke. In Spain, the summer weather forecast all too often has neat little yellow suns dotted across the entire map, with not a cloud in sight, and it's often the same picture in Greece or Italy, not to mention North Africa or the Caribbean. So really, there's no need to stick to the beach like pagans who can't believe the sun will ever return. In fact, too much sun can ruin your holiday. Maybe we should take a tip or two from the locals.

Clothing makes a huge difference. In many hot countries, such as those in the Middle East, people often wear wear loose, pale-coloured cottons, and they should know. While you may not want to run around in a kaftan, consider a shirt that's a size too big, and don't tuck it into your trousers. Women have always had the advantage of skirts, but men can follow the David Beckham look, and wrap up in a simple beach sarong, letting the air circulate where it counts. In India, they swear by the humble vest, nicknaming it 'private air-conditioning'.

There's a saying that 'when even salamanders are fainting from the heat, there's nothing like a good, hot Madras curry', and people eat chillies in nearly all the world's truly hot countries because they make you sweat. Mexicans must have their jalapeño peppers, Jamaicans love the fiery, sour 'scotch bonnets', and we all know about Indian curry. Interestingly, it's the hottest, driest Indian states like Tamil Nadu and Rajasthan where dishes are fiercest. Tea is another Indian favourite: the hot liquid cools you down much better than an ice-cold drink. Moroccans can hardly drink enough mint tea, which even tastes cold.

Even if you are a mad dog, stay out of the midday sun. This is the time to take a long lunch, and a longer siesta. It works all over Spain and Latin America. Get up early, when it's cool, and stay out late. Turn up at a Spanish restaurant at seven o'clock and you'll eat with other tourists - the locals come out at around ten. And there's nothing like strolling along the streets of an old Italian town, eating ice cream at midnight.

Travel Tips: Hot and Dry Weather
Wear a hat. Floppy cotton ones with brims are the most practical, and if it's all becoming too much you can just run it under a tap or dip it in a stream before putting it back on your head. Not only does the cool water give instant relief, but as it evaporates from the top it'll act like a tiny refrigerator.

